Dear Reader,
Please hold on! I know many people typically do not read the Preface of a book. But I strongly
recommend that you read this particular Preface.
It is not the main objective of this book to present you with the theorems and proofs on data
structures and algorithms. I have followed a pattern of improving the problem solutions with
different complexities (for each problem, you will find multiple solutions with different, and
reduced, complexities). Basically, it’s an enumeration of possible solutions. With this approach,
even if you get a new question, it will show you a way to think about the possible solutions. You
will find this book useful for interview preparation, competitive exams preparation, and campus
interview preparations.
As a job seeker, if you read the complete book, I am sure you will be able to challenge the
interviewers. If you read it as an instructor, it will help you to deliver lectures with an approach
that is easy to follow, and as a result your students will appreciate the fact that they have opted for
Computer Science / Information Technology as their degree.
This book is also useful for Engineering degree students and Masters degree students during
their academic preparations. In all the chapters you will see that there is more emphasis on
problems and their analysis rather than on theory. In each chapter, you will first read about the
basic required theory, which is then followed by a section on problem sets. In total, there are
approximately 700 algorithmic problems, all with solutions.
If you read the book as a student preparing for competitive exams for Computer Science /
Information Technology, the content covers all the required topics in full detail. While writing
this book, my main focus was to help students who are preparing for these exams.
In all the chapters you will see more emphasis on problems and analysis rather than on theory. In
each chapter, you will first see the basic required theory followed by various problems.
For many problems, multiple solutions are provided with different levels of complexity. We start
with the brute force solution and slowly move toward the best solution possible for that problem.
For each problem, we endeavor to understand how much time the algorithm takes and how much
memory the algorithm uses.
It is recommended that the reader does at least one complete reading of this book to gain a full
understanding of all the topics that are covered. Then, in subsequent readings you can skip
directly to any chapter to refer to a specific topic. Even though many readings have been done for
the purpose of correcting errors, there could still be some minor typos in the book. If any are
found, they will be updated at www.CareerMonk.com. You can monitor this site for any
corrections and also for new problems and solutions. Also, please provide your valuable
suggestions at: Info@CareerMonk.com.
I wish you all the best and I am confident t